# AngularJS Learning


I’m beginning on a short quest to get rocking with AngularJS. I did a sort of
curriculum-like method for learning Ember, and it turned out really well.

My writeup for that was reflective though, and I’m sure I either missed some
parts, or unconciously distrorted it to a fit a narrative. This will outline
the steps I’m taking, as I’m taking it.

===

 **1) Google search Angular learning resources. Found a great intro video to
get started —**

 **2) While watching video, also discovered a quick codeschool course on it**

<http://campus.codeschool.com/courses/shaping-up-with-angular-
js/level/1/section/1/video/1>

I’ll probably do this right after. The reason I don’t jump right into making
an MVC app is because I’d like to have a slightly deeper technical
understanding of Angular and it’s best practices.

 **Update on 2) —** Wow! I really enjoyed this tutorial. Excellent way to
cover ground. When taking it, I suggest you make your own local version of the
app that you’ll be creating on it. It’ll help you internalize much better.

 **3) Time to look for tutorials on integrating Angular with a backend**

I’ve got an understanding of Angular’s core features, but one open question is
how Angular handles data via a RESTful API. I’ll be searching for tutorials on
making it. Another question I have is about how to best structure an app using
angular, and when to use custom directives, etc. I think to get a better sense
of this, making an actual Rails App would teach a bunch.

Right now, I’m thinking of making an app to save all of your favorite ideas,
but before getting into it, I have 2 other considerations to think about.
There’s a coding challenge I’ll be at in a few days, and I’d like to set up a
dev environment for it. Once done with that, I also want to knowt the basics
of react.js. Before any of that, I also have a bunch of consulting work to
finish off.

Will be back on updating this post in a few days.

 **4) Teach Allen a what I learned**

While doing the immediete client objectives, I moved along with Angular
learning, with an interesting experiment — a great coder friend of myne and I
have been switching roles as teachers to eachother — this time I taught him
what I learned with Angular. It helped cement some thoughts, and exposed what
I didn’t know. Very useful.

 **5) Discovered Great Rails and Angular Tutorial**

Was scowering around for a tutorial that would help cement routing and
services for Angular. Usually there’s always a ‘build a blog with x and y’
tutorial, so I searched it up and found something excellent ->
<https://github.com/asanderson15/rails-angular-tutorial>

