# Two stories I share with my nephews, to help them take risks and follow their curiosity


 **Story 1: The Dice**

I ask them:

 _Imagine there’s a game of dice. If you roll any number but 5, you give me
one dollar. But, if you roll a 5, I’ll give you 600 dollars._

 _Would you play the game?_

 **They invariably say yes.**

(Some say, “depends on how much money I have”, which case I pat them on back,
as they discovered expected utility. I then tell them though they have a
hundred bucks at hand, and they say yes again : ))

Now I tell them:

 _Imagine someone walked by you and saw you play the game._

Most of the time, other people will see you lose. They’ll think you’re dumb.

Here they get heated, and say — heck, that person doesn’t know how big I’ll
win! I agree, and then ask them:

 _Imagine now, it’a a 60-sided die. You still lose a dollar each time, but if
you get a 5, you win 6 million._

They get excited by the millions, and say they’ll take it. Yet, I remind them,
_now if someone sees you, they’ll almost **always** think you’re dumb._

And from there, we get to the lesson:

 **It’s important to try for things, even if you have a small chance of
winning**. _So…apply for that scholarship, try out for that team. Yes, maybe
you’ll lose, and heck, you’re likely to lose, but that’s the whole point._

* * *

 **Story 2: The track captain and the climate change speaker**

 _Note: I discovered this story as a kid myself from one of Cal Newport’s blog
posts. I can’t find it, so will reproduce here. Highly suggest[checking out
his blog](https://www.calnewport.com)!_

I start with:

 _Imagine two stories:_

A. One person is the captain of their high school track and field team.

B. One person gave a speech on climate change at the United Nations.

 _Who is more impressive?_

 **They invariably say B: climate change.**

(If I tell this to Eastern European parents, they say A. track captain,
because they think the UN person got in through insider connections. I tell
them to ignore this though, and imagine it was earned :P)

 _I then ask: why?_

After some minutes, I explain:

 ** _With track captain: you can _imagine_ how they did it_** _._

If someone wakes up every day at 6am and works very very hard, they can become
the track captain.

But with climate change it’s hard to imagine — _how the heck_ did they get
there?

From there comes the remarkable lesson about remarkable things: **_Remarkable
things can’t be planned._** _If you can plan something into the future, surely
it’s easy to imagine how it can be done looking backwards._

 _So…then, how do you do remarkable things?_

 **The only path is to follow your curiosity**. If you follow what you’re
interested in, no matter how wacky it looks, you’ll look back after some time
and say “huh”, how did that happen.

I then give them an example of how it could have happened for the climate
change person: maybe they were into it, they started a blog, they got a group
together, they wrote something that got shared, and boom, they made it to the
U.N. That would have been impossible to plan.

This means **_follow your curiosity. Don’t get caught up by the urge to be #1
in some list at your school. Instead, talk with your like-minded friends,
play, and see the world unfold around you_**

