# Crazy Ideas


 _Note: This piece is specifically directed to people who work at mid-large
companies. The ideas will still apply to you if you work at smaller companies,
but they’ll come as less of a surprise._

At any point in time at a company, you can find a bunch of ideas to make
things better.

You can create features that make your customers happier. You can create tools
to make your engineers more productive. Or…you can launch completely new
products.

The questions to ask are _“Who gets these ideas”_ and “ _How do they get these
ideas?”_

In larger companies, there’s an implicit understanding that ideas come top-
down. It’s as though there’s a _line_ for innovation: the best ideas come to
the CEO, and maybe one day some of them trickle down to you.

Yet, is that how things work?

Thankfully, reality doesn’t work that way. If you look around you, you’ll see
that some of the best ideas in the world come from some of the most unexpected
places.

For example:

Memcached — did it come from a senior architect at google? Nope…young kid
[working on scaling their
project](https://books.google.com/books?id=2kMIqdfyT8kC&pg=PA59&lpg=PA59&dq=%22I+don%27t+think+i+did+memcached+until+like+right+after+college%22&source=bl&ots=Mm9tnfMCwG&sig=ACfU3U3byMC3wDEsQJAgfk3GXZtNMPqDKg&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwiq28K0lq7mAhUFEqwKHRyLDIkQ6AEwAHoECAMQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22I%20don't%20think%20i%20did%20memcached%20until%20like%20right%20after%20college%22&f=false)
(LiveJournal!).

Gmail — did it come from an ex-hotmail VP? Nope, [24 year old who tried
creating an email client
before](https://books.google.com/books?id=ktm885vGIXEC&pg=PA161&lpg=PA161&dq=%22Was+Gmail+a+side+project+or+commissioned+by+Google?%22&source=bl&ots=vVANNhSI6h&sig=ACfU3U0Lgw8k8SL1Pcbtem_2QweDxeSgmw&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjC9bKalK7mAhVEIKwKHbxpDmIQ6AEwAHoECAoQAQ#v=onepage&q=%22Was%20Gmail%20a%20side%20project%20or%20commissioned%20by%20Google%3F%22&f=false),
and decided to do that again at Google.

Airbnb — did it come from veterans in the hospitality industry? Nope…[just a
few friends trying to make rent](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KOytubycHOg).

Stripe — did it come from veteran payments execs? Nope…[just two
brothers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WfvqheCk4t8) frustrated with taking
payments online.

 _This is happening all over the place externally._ And, even though it may
not seem like it, **_it’s happening all over the place at larger companies
too_**.

Don’t believe me? Try this: look over a few of your favorite tools and
products at work. Try to find the origin story. You may be delighted with what
you find! (If you do this, I’d love to hear the origin stories that speak to
you in the comments!)

We begin to see that ideas are _not_ top-down. Well, how _do ideas come then?_

The more stories you see, the more you notice a pattern: **_Ideas come to
people who face problems, talk to customers, and tinker._** Paul Graham goes
over this quite well in his [essay on startup
ideas](http://www.paulgraham.com/startupideas.html), and they apply at larger
companies just as well.

That’s really all you need to do. The beautiful thing about this? Notice
what’s missing: title, pedigree, experience. None of that is required. Just
face problems, talk to customers, and tinker.

At this point, you may be facing some resistance. You may think — it’s just
_not_ how it works at my company.

Yet…I encourage you to try and test your assumptions.

Most leaders _want_ people like you. They know ideas can come in the most
unexpected places. Now, there _will_ be a spectrum of resistance. At most
smaller tech companies you’ll find sympathy and support, while at more
bureaucratic places you’ll face much more resistance.

However, If you try, you’ll contribute to the culture within your company that
nurtures innovation and employee engagement. If you do this, you’ll give your
company the ultimate competitive advantage and discover a bunch of like-minded
people too.

## Two action items, and a note

 **1\. Action Item: #crazy-ideas**

At Airbnb, we have a slack channel called #crazy-ideas. This is a space for
people to get together and spitball _any idea._ So far we’ve found it great
for encouraging innovation and engagement. I think Stripe has something
similar (I was inspired to create this channel from a conversation with some
of the engineers there). If you don’t have this, try starting one off at your
company.

 **2\. Action Item: origin stories.**

In this essay I asked you to look into origin stories of some of your favorite
products. What came up? If you’re up to share it, I’d love to hear!

 **3\. Note: On facing resistance**

As you test your assumptions, you’ll be surprised with how much you can do,
but at some point you will invariably face resistance. There’s a whole trove
of strategy here: aligning with teams, finding buy-in, managing up, building
momentum, the list goes on. This will come for another essay. Meanwhile, if
you start facing these problems, ping me and I’d happy to riff.

 _Thanks to Avand Amiri, Daniel Woelfel, Eric Ning, Jacky Wang, Julien Odent
for reviewing this essay_

