# School, Nietzsche, and Comfort for High School Kids


I have four fierce and independent nephews. Three of them are over 13, which
means they’re now “serious” about academics. They also have equally fierce
moms with high expectations, and that means report card season can get tough.

To help them get through the ordeal, I repeat a few ideas over and over. I
realized these ideas apply to all ages, so I thought I'd share them with you.

Here’s what I tell them:

**Your goal is curiosity**

I don’t think grades are important.

 _(This gives them a bit of a shock, and their mom raises an eyebrow, but I
forge on)_

You can do so much more than what’s expected of you. _Just_ getting good
grades won’t have you feeling like you’re becoming the person you want to be.

I want you to make great friends and explore. Create games, music, launch
businesses, play, investigate, talk to that girl, do whatever drives you.
Those experiences forge your character and teach you in uncountable ways

 _Adult Aside —_ _Think about how much of your time is spent on status games.
The most leveraged, creative work comes when you’re_ [_following your
taste_](https://www.stopa.io/post/230) _. Are your goals just about the status
game, or something bigger?_

 **But grades are your day job**

You still want to get good grades though. This keeps your options open, gives
you chances to learn new things, and keeps people from asking too many
questions.

At this point, they invariably say: _But…some courses I’m just not interested
in — when will X be useful, etc_

Treat this as your day job and a challenge. What’s the minimum time you need
to spend to get the grade you want on those courses?

If you focus on the challenge, a lot of your time will be spent figuring out
creative solutions and productivity hacks. This itself will be more fun than
the course, help you build discipline, and learn techniques that will be
useful to you throughout life. Remember, you just want to do a good job so you
can be that inventor, renaissance explorer, hacker, or artist that you want to
be.

_Adult Aside —_ _Before google came around, search was boring: a “simple”
technical problem that no one wanted to solve anymore. Google turned it into a
very interesting problem. Think about how you could do that to some of your
grudging must-do tasks. At the very least it will strengthen your discipline_

 **Be wary of slave morality**

They may interject with a platitude: W _hat’s important is to be a good
person, I don’t kiss up to the teacher, who cares about grades._

Have you heard of Nietzche’s slave morality? Be wary of combining bad
characteristics with good ones. You can get good grades _and_ be a good
person.

Learn to catch yourself doing this, because it will happen all the time in
your life. Now it’s grades, but tomorrow it may be “Rich people are evil, I’m
not evil”.

You may feel good about yourself, but if you follow this idea, you won’t get
what you want. Instead, ask the question: “How can I get good grades and *not
kiss up?” Find people like that and learn from them.

 _Adult Aside —_ _Anytime you want something that you don’t have, this
thinking will materialize. “Oh people who are fit spend so much time in the
gym, I’m not that kind of person”, etc etc. Be careful about the constraints
you set with your ideas._

 **Be wary of all or nothing thinking**

Slave morality can get hard to swallow, so they may say — _but grades are
unfair. Even if I do well the teacher can knock me for “participation”, that’s
why the kiss-up people get good grades._

You’re right. This is frustrating and unfair. And there’s a reason some people
kiss up: it’s easier to do that. But, just because some parts are unfair and
some people cheat, doesn’t mean you should give up on what you want. The world
isn’t so black and white.

 _Tell yourself: you will do what’s under your control._ Learn from the people
you admire who behave the way you think is right. Yes some people have an
advantage, yes some things are plain unfair, but you can still get what you
want. If you do all of that and it doesn't work, you'll know you tried your
best, and something better will certainly happen regardless.

_Adult Aside —_ _I remember Ramit Sethi telling the story of someone who
wanted to start working out, but only had one day free a week. Instead of
working out once a week, they didn’t work out at all. They thought it had to
be 5 times a week. The more you can let go of the black and white nature of
childhood, the more you’ll flourish_

 **Be wary of comfort**

A final interjection may come from comfort — _I want to learn this thing, but
I don’t want to look dumb, etc._

If you lived in our village, you’d be _prettyy cool._ Wow you study in the big
city, wow, you know so much math, wow you are good at fighting.

But imagine if you met a navy seal from Afghanistan. How do you think your
fighting skill would stack up?

If you _actually_ want to become great, you have to get outside of your
comfort zone _._ Actively look for those opportunities. You’ll have an urge to
drop them because you want to feel cool…but hey it’s better to _be_ cool then
to _feel_ cool

 _Adult Aside —_ _Ask yourself constantly, where are the people I can learn
from? It can be uncomfortable to go from the best person in the room to
a[noob](http://paulgraham.com/noob.html), but this is the path forward_

**Appreciations**

Many of these ideas crystallized by reading two people have inspired me:
Nassim Taleb and Paul Graham. Nassim for elucidating the life of the flaneur,
and Paul for his essay [“What you’d wish you’d
known”](http://www.paulgraham.com/hs.html)

 _Thanks to Nino Parunashvili, Elene Asanidze, Alex Reichert, Julien Odent for
reviewing drafts of this essay_

