# Why change


I recently watched a Georgian movie on Netflix. In case you’re not Georgian,
this is like seeing your school on national television — oh wow, a Georgian
movie on Netflix!

I watched it, and it was pretty heart warming. The mood overall in the movie
was perhaps skewed negative, but it definitely captured a slice of life in
Georgian culture. The ever-joking discussion, the love of family,
responsibility, and all of its’ consequences.

I saw a moment in the movie that struck me, and I wanted to dig deeper. In the
beginning of the movie, you meet this family. The son is playing video games,
while the father walks over to a closet to grab something. As he opens the
closet door, a musical instrument falls out. Rushing, he mutters “I spent all
this money on you to practice this instrument, and here it is, stuck in a
closet”.

I cracked a smile, because that is such a stereotypically Georgian saying.
Well, maybe it’s common internationally too — I could certainly see a grandma
in Taiwan saying the same thing.

It’s innocuous, but I think this contributes to a dangerous lesson.

“Hey, I did this for you, I expect you to be doing something for me now.” When
a child hears that, what do they take away from it?

They take away _guilt_ — their parents sacrificed for them, so now it is their
_responsibility_ to play that instrument. They don’t play for fun, curiosity,
personal interest, or drive anymore. Just painful, dry, guilt and
responsibility.

I can almost hear someone say — “Well, why not? It _is_ their responsibility”

Compare a person driven by guilt, with a person driven by playful obsession.
For one every minute is drudgery, for the other it’s flow. Even if they
achieve the same result, one of them will certainly have a different
experience. Responsibility has a place, but using it as your main drive is
playing life on hard mode.

I think one of the best things my parents did for me, was to not pressure me
unduly about going to University. In Georgian, the word for “education” is
“enlightenment”, so I imagine how hard it was for them to see their son
“unenlightened”. If they had just said “look what we did for you, how dare you
throw it all away”, I am not sure I would have the heart go with my path. Yet,
they didn’t say that — they supported me, and even sent me emergency western
unions in China without too many questions. They put a wind behind my sails
with their belief, and that allowed me to go deeper, and discover what’s play
for me, which is work for most.

* * *

 _I wrote this essay, in reflection of Mother’s day today_

