# Siren Calls and Compasses


How do we develop our identity? I subscribe to Hofstaedter’s theory [1].
Paraphrased it’s like this:

As newborns we’re blissfully unaware of any distinction between ourselves and
our surroundings. We identify those distinctions, by searching for the
fundamental patterns that guide our reality.

We must learn the concept of _limbs_ for example: that we can control our own
_hands_ , and that we can’t control other people’s hands. Soon we identify
_humans_. From there maybe _mom_ and _dad_.

We find ecstasy and disappointment through our various attempts at
manipulating our environment. As we accumulate a store of patterns, we can
combine them and form even more complex patterns.

Say a few years go by, and you’re playing with a toy. It breaks, so you peer
over to investigate. Your mom sees this and says “You’re a born engineer”. A
germ of a pattern begins to form. There’s of course _you_ and _born engineer._
Perhaps your dad repeats this, a few more events go by, and you realize “ _I’m
a born engineer_ ”. One more pattern in the store.

Put all the patterns together, and you get _you_. I find Hofstaedter’s idea
mathematically beautiful. You can define yourself as a recursive function:

[code]

    You(T) = IntegrateExperience(You(T-1), Experience(T)) 
    You(0) = YourInherentPersonality
[/code]

Every experience reflects onto and evolves your brain, contributing to the
tapestry of identity that is you.

Now, there’s a lot to split hairs about in this definition. For example, it
doesn’t much allow for free will. I could waive this away, by the defense that
`IntegrateExperience` has so many dimensions that it amounts to free will.
But, this essay isn’t really about Hofstaedter’s theory. It’s about one
specific externality.

I want to put forth the idea that we define our sense of self largely by how
other people interact with us.

Yes, for all intents and purposes there’s free will, and yes, your inherent
disposition plays a big role, and yes, it’s complicated, but if you reflect on
your own experience, I think you’ll agree that what other people think has
played a large role in developing your identity.

### Siren Calls

Now, if that’s true, what are the downstream consequences?

As you get smarter, you no longer have to wait for others to give you direct
hints at who you are. Instead, you can see what society values and chase after
it.

It starts easy. Perhaps you see what people say about smart kids, and you want
that identity. You strive to become a top student in your school. Then, you
try to go to the best University. And from there, depending on your
environment, you either _join the best firm_ , or _strike out on your own_.

At each point, you’re inundated with pattern after pattern. For example, say
you _strike out on your own_. You notice that the most ambitious people are
working on _climate change._ So you mimic their airs and begin your journey to
save the world. But a few months in, and now, all the talk is about wildfires
in California. Before you have time to pivot, it’s all about _remote first_.
Wait what about _Web3_ , and don’t forget _Machine Learning_.

To make things worse, society’s pull isn’t uniform. With the macro pull
(society), there are also just-as-strong micro pulls (individual). You could
kick off your climate change journey for example, but your parents may think
you’re wasting your time. Oops. If identity was what you were after, suddenly
the plan loses it’s luster. Contending with different pulls that change every
three months…even if you get everything right you’re on brittle foundations.

### Ends

The story I painted for you is extreme. It’s easy to make fun of the
hypothetical actor and remove ourselves from it. After all, our brains are
very good at convincing ourselves that “Actually, pivoting into wildfires in
California is exactly what I wanted to do from the start”. But apply some
humility, and I think you’ll see parts of yourself.

Where does it all lead? Let the siren calls guide you, and you risk wasting
away your life. Even if you win this game, you’ve lost. Who are you really if
you have never formed an opinion that’s your own? If you flit and follow the
tidal waves of society, can anyone really trust you? Can you even trust
yourself?

I think we seldom wake up from siren calls like this until it’s too late.
Maybe the “mid-life crisis” is such a moment for many. But even then, why does
just about everyone collect sports cars and romantic flings? Just one more
siren call of society.

If you’re like me, the idea that you’re part of the tidal wave makes you
bristle with emotion. A life of ups and downs, at the whims of the opinion of
the many. I don’t think I can think of anything more cowardly.

Yet, what is the alternative. Could you define your sense of self as separate
from any interaction with the outside world? Can you really be uncaring for
what other people think?

From all I can gather, I don’t think so. You are inexorably linked with your
connections with others. To revolt against it is to revolt against your
humanity, to become a malfunctioning robot.

But I don’t think hope is lost. The very fact that we bristle with emotion
gives us a clue. If we can’t change the equation, perhaps we can use it to our
advantage, as our compass.

### Experience(T)

The reason we bristle, I think, is that we have seen a path to a different
kind of identity.

After all, we don’t tend to admire the person who flits between flowers. We
admire the hero who is unwavering with their principles. The person who tells
the truth even when it hurts. The person who lifts up and supports those
around them.

Where do these ideas come from? These ideas too come from society, but from a
much more timeless place.

Our world is fantastically multi-dimensional, and thanks to the power of
words, our wisdom transcends time. In the same way that you can pick up the
identity that you are a “Wealthy, Type-A achiever” from your Twitter
personality du-jour, you can pick up the idea that you are “A person who never
lies”, from the fiction of Rafael Sabatini, or a “someone who is unfazed by
the whims of fortune” from the writings of Seneca.

And hence one of our points of most severe leverage. We must influence the
`Experience` that we feed our identity.

Society tends to drive us towards the superficial, but this is only true on
average. Our world is filled with wisdom, with archetypes that demonstrates
what truly matters. Values like honor, chivalry, righteousness, caring for the
weak, sacrifice for the collective, are exemplified throughout the annals of
history.

How do you know some of these “identities” are worth taking on? One clue is
time. If you find yourself inspired by the behavior of someone in the 4th
Century, they’re likely doing something right.

But you can’t just get lost in books. In the same way that you can learn to
value Dom Perignon and clubbing, you can value calling your family and doing
what’s right. Your choice of living heroes, and your choice of friendships,
are an overwhelming factor.

When you see your friend devote a 3 hour call with their uncle, or craft a
special birthday experience for a loved one, you put into perspective what
matters and what doesn’t.

### IntegrateExperience(You, Experience)

So, given the multi-dimensional nature of our reality, we can _choose_ the
Experiences that lead us to timeless identities. But, this is not enough.
After all, `Experience` is just input to `IntegrateExperience`.

This, is where the real test lies. Learning that something is good, is
different than doing what is good. Doing has a cost to it. Say you went
through a tough experience: maybe you lost a bunch of money for example. How
do you handle it? You’ve seen the examples of the heroes, but how will you
behave?

Every difficult action done well, is proof towards a timeless identity. If you
follow the logic of our `You` function, you’re literally changing yourself by
the action.

### Grandma’s Wisdom

And really, what does the conclusion come to? We come to the idea, that a good
life is forged from fundamental, timeless values: honor, erudition, and truth.
To overcome the inertia of society, be careful about what you consume, choose
your friends wisely, and train yourself to make the hard decisions when they
come, for they are what transform you.

I think many a grandparent in my home country would tell you the same thing.
Perhaps that is one further proof to the soundness of these principles — this
idea itself is tested by time. I hope this essay serves as an inspiring
`Experience(T)` for you, as it has been for me in writing it 🙂

_Thanks to Alex Reichert, Joe Averbukh, Jacky Wang for reviewing drafts of
this essay._

