# What Artists Notice


## Painters

Painters at work notice details we’d ignore. From those details they develop
delightful insights into reality. What do I mean? Let’s take a gander at Van
Eyck’s “Arnolfini Portrait” to find out:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTAxMi0wOTFiNDBmZi00MTdmLTQ0NjktODJmNi1mMDlhZjVjNWZjNDkucG5n)

Arnolfini Portrait, Jan van Eyck

## Attention

The most whimsical idea starts with _what_ Van Eyck painted. Do you think
anyone in the world has paid more attention to this room than Van Eyk has?
Look at the prayer beads beside the mirror:

### Beads

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTA2MS1kYjg2MWNiNS1iMzljLTQ0YTUtYmE4Yy1kMTQ0ODg0MjkwNmUucG5n)

Prayer beads

Don’t they seem uncannily real? Imagine the kind of detail he’d have to notice
to get the beads this right. The more you look, the more details you uncover.
Notice how rich the wife’s dress is: the intricate folds, the patterns, the
material. I’m not sure anyone but the dressmaker could have scrutinized it
with more care. And even the dog is gifted with attention; look at its fur!

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTE3MC1hMDcwYjdmZC03NDZjLTRlMWItOTNmOS1lNzMyYjNmZjJmOGMucG5n)

The doggo

Try it yourself [1]. Pick a random spot and zoom into the painting. You’ll
discover a world of detail you hadn’t seen. From here, it’s safe to say that
at least Van Eyck noticed details we’d ignore.

### Monet

But is this true for all painters? Van Eyck was known to bring his paintings
to life with layers of detail. How about someone like Monet, who didn’t follow
that strategy? Let’s look at his water lilies:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTIyNy03YjVmMmZlMy03Zjc3LTRiNDctYWE0Yy0yODcwYmZjMDVlODcucG5n)

Water Lilies, Claude Monet

You’d be surprised. Monet actually created 250 paintings of water lilies in
the _same_ pond, to study the effect of light there. You saw 1 of 250, a
devotion that engrossed close to three decades of his life. How much more do
you think you’d see in a pond of water lilies, if you spent 30 years looking?

Our brains ignore details and see the essence of things. We barely notice the
prayer beads, and wouldn’t take more than a few glances at the reflection of
water lilies. The brush, however, forced Van Eyck and Monet to stop and see
more. From there is born the premise that painters notice details we’d ignore.

## Insight

Now details by themselves, although interesting, aren’t general. Who cares if
Van Eyck was intimately aware of prayer beads or if Monet had a deeper
understanding of a pond? Let’s zoom out and see some of the larger
implications. Back to the Arnolfini Portrait:

### Fruit

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTI3Mi1jMGM1YTAwNi02MjhhLTQ2NDEtYjlkNi1iYjhjYTE1ZTQxMDgucG5n)

What's up with the fruit?

Why is there fruit by the window? How about the clogs? Do you see all the
various symmetrical arrangements: the bead and the broom, the grey clogs and
the red clogs, the couple’s position? And what about the colors? Why is the
husband wearing a dark purple coat, and not a red one? Look at the wife’s
gesture. It’s so maidenly, but why?

### Subconscious

PG originally shared this idea in a masterful essay [2], and I’ll adopt it
here. Every painting Van Eyck made had a purpose; to _affect_ his audience. He
may have wanted to please, shock, or dazzle; the spectrum of human emotions
were fully available to him. This also meant that every painting worked doubly
as a test; did it achieve its purpose? The more Van Eyck painted, the more he
discovered exactly what worked.

Slowly but surely details amalgamated into patterns, and Van Eyck began to map
our subconscious drivers. He discovered our inborn love of symmetry for
example, and used it to masterful advantage throughout the painting. He
discovered the gestures that make us feel innocence, and now we can’t help but
see it in the wife. [3]

When we look at his work, feelings and thoughts burgeon up, but we can’t put
our finger on _why._ Well, Van Eyck could put his finger on why, and there
comes the painter’s first insight: _they learn what affects humans._

Already we hit an interesting philosophical plane. When you learn what affects
humans, you’re bound to ask why. But it gets grander.

## Reality

I left the coolest part of this painting last. Look at the mirror:

### Mirror

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTMyOC04YWEzZTc4NS1jNjAxLTQ3OWMtOTBmYS04MjZiOTEwMjNkYTUucG5n)

Hacker level 1000

Van Eyk painted the reflection! You can even see two folks peering back at the
couple. [4]

Outside the effort this must have taken, imagine what Van Eyck learned. How
deeply have you thought about how light reflects in convex mirrors? I’d bet a
lot less than Van Eyck after this painting. In fact, some have tried to see
just how accurate Van Eyck was, and compared his depiction with what a real
convex mirror would have reflected [5]:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2NTM0NjExNi1iODJlYjlkYi0zMzEzLTRlOTctYjAxMi0wYWM3NDQ5Yzg3ZjYucG5n)

Van Eyck vs reality

 _a_ is Van Eyck’s work, and _d_ is the mathematically correct version. The
similarity is remarkable.

### Nature

Not only did Van Eyck have to learn what affected humans, but the brush forced
him to see deeply into the real world. The mirror is just the beginning.
Imagine what he learned trying to draw the shadows. What about the chandelier?
Here we hit the painter’s second insight: _they learn to unravel the secrets
of nature._

## Transcendence

As a painters master these insights, they take the canvas to heights we
couldn’t have imagined before. For example, look at Botticelli’s “The Birth of
Venus”

### Venus

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTUwNi0xZjgwY2Y2Mi1mMDBkLTRjNDgtOTdkMy1lYzMxY2YyYzliNTAucG5n)

Birth of Venus, Sandro Botticelli

Stuff like symmetry here is obvious. But, glance over Venus’ neck:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTU4MS0yMWQ1MzQ4ZC00MWQ4LTQzZDgtODVhMC0wNGJhNTFkMDFkYjUucG5n)

What’s up with the neck?

It’s longer than a normal human neck! Or look at her hands and shoulders, a
bit lower and longer than normal. Botticelli hacked our minds. He knew what
pushed our buttons, so he didn’t just describe reality, he accentuated it. He
showed us a view of Venus’s elegance that could only be achieved through
painting. [6]

### Redefinition

Eventually, painters can eschew reality’s constraints in ground-breaking ways,
and show us what our eyes could never see:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTYzMy02ZjVlZmUyNi03ZDUwLTRhZTctYjc1Ny0xNDNmMDZhMjhlYzAucG5n)

Starry Night, Van Gogh

These insights touch on what makes painting _art._ Painting isn’t a rote
exercise, but an inquiry into reality and perception.

* * *

## Programmers

Here’s a jump: I think programmers have a similar experience [7]. Programmers
at work notice details we’d ignore. From those details they develop delightful
insights into reality.

Now, programming is not as far along as painting yet; our art has just begun.
Like painting in the early renaissance, our work is crude, but we’re accruing
insight after insight. What are these insights?

Let’s find out by answering a question: what would a programmer notice if they
made an _app_ for painters? We’ll call it pixel.fyi, and we’ll help painters
draw stuff online. Here’s our goal:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTY3OC1hNThiZDhkMS1jYzA3LTQ3YjYtOGJiMC04N2VkN2FlOGY0ZGEucG5n)

The Goal

## Origins

Before we get into what programmers notice, let’s learn what programmers _do_.
Today our devices are so sophisticated that they seem intelligent, as though
they “understand” what we want from them.

However, this intelligence is an illusion built upon illusions, and is perhaps
the masterwork of the pioneer programmers of our time. Computers aren’t
intelligent. Instead, they do simple things, like add and subtract numbers,
_very_ quickly.

### Adding Machine

To a get sense, here’s the great-great-grandfather of our modern computer:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTczMC04ZTBhZTZmMi02Y2U5LTQ2NzQtOTlmNC03YTA5NDM4ZjhhYWMucG5n)

Adding Machine

Here we have three light switches labeled “1”, “2”, and “3”. We also have
three light bulbs labeled “3”, “4”, and “5”.

Now, would it be possible to wire things up so that if someone turned on our
“1” and “2” light switch, the “3” light bulb would turn on?

It doesn’t seem so difficult, and we’d hardly call it intelligence, but if we
did this we would have created a machine that could _add_ 1 and 2!

### Speed

That’s cool, but here’s something startling: though crude, our invention adds
numbers faster than any human ever could. The answer comes at the speed of
light through a wire; this means our machine can make _millions_ of
calculations by the time you finish this sentence.

### Language

Interestingly, our machine also has the same advantage as modern computers, in
that the answer comes quickly, and the same disadvantage, in that
fundamentally there is no intelligence.

So what’s the big difference? Our machine is specific; it can _only_ add 1 to
3. Modern computers are general; they can do any computation. Instead of
wiring things up a specific way, modern computers let us use a computer
language to _simulate_ wiring things up in any way we like. It looks something
like this:

[code]

    if light_switch_1 is on and light_switch_2 is on:
      turn_on(bulb_3)
[/code]

With that code, it’s as though we “wired up” our great-great-grandfather
machine!

We come to the essence of what programmers do. They write precise instructions
in a computer language, to get computers to solve problems. _Precise_ is the
key word here, because at the end of the day it all boils down to switches
that turn on and off.

## Attention, II

Okay, back to programmers today. The most whimsical idea starts with _what_
they create. For example, in order for pixel.fyi to work, at the very least we
need to let our users draw simple shapes, like circles or squares.

### Circles

Well, how would a computer draw a circle? Switches have no concept of
“circle”. Here’s one idea:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTc3OS1mOTE4YTA2OS1mMmQ3LTQyNTAtYWYwMS1hNTNmMmUzY2M2M2MucG5n)

Circle

Let’s imagine the monitor is like a grid, where we can turn each pixel on or
off. A circle is really _all_ the pixels that are a specific distance away
from a center point. If we could just figure out all the pixels to turn on,
we’d have a circle!

### Trigonometry

And how do we figure out those pixels? Let’s remember some math:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTgzMC1jY2Y0NDA5ZS0wMzI3LTRjNjktYmFhMi01ODYyMTcxYmMzNWMucG5n)

Trig

We could draw a right-angle triangle going from the center to a point on our
circle at any particular degree. We can then use trigonometry to find the x
and y coordinates for the point! All of a sudden, we have a plan to draw a
circle. Here’s how a programmer could express it in a computer language:

[code]

    radius = 20
    pixels = []
    for degrees in [0..360]:
      x = radius * cos(degrees)
      y = radius * sin(degrees)
      into(pixels, [x, y])
      
    turn_on(pixels)
[/code]

For every degree between 0 and 360, we calculate the `x` and `y` coordinates,
and we have our pixel. We can then `turn_on` pixels, and voila, our circle is
born! [8] Here’s how this would look:

[_See the code_](https://replit.com/@StepanParunashv/Circle#script.js)

### Detail

So what’s the consequence of all of this? Look how much we learned about
circles. Not only did we breath life to trigonometry, but we discovered the
“essence” of a circle: it’s all the points that are equidistant from a center.
And if you think about it, this is the _same_ definition for a sphere! A
sphere is all the points that are equidistant from a center in three
dimensions. And now for a mind-bender: this must mean that “circle” exists in
infinite dimensions; there’s a “4-D circle”, with points equidistant from a
center! [9]

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTkxOS1iMGRmNjU4Yy1mZDQ2LTRmODUtOTc1My03YWYwMjAxMWY1MjYucG5n)

4-D Circle?!

Our brains ignore details and see the essence of things. When we look at
circles, the only property likely to burgeon up is that they’re round. The
computer language however, forced us to see more. Sound familiar? From here is
born the premise that programmers notice details we’d ignore.

## Insight, II

Now details by themselves, though interesting, aren’t general. Who cares if we
know more about circles than the average person? Well, let’s zoom out to see
some of the larger implications. We can kick off with a roundabout journey,
and take a look at algebra.

### Variables

Do you remember the kind of homework you did in middle school? Stuff like:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NTk4NC02NDZlNGY4Ny03YjRkLTQwZmItODNkYi05NWEzNDVkZTc3MDgucG5n)

x + 2 = 5

Here, `x` is 3. Now, where did `x` _come_ from? When we write `x`, we are
using the concept of a _variable._ But variables didn’t always exist! They
were only invented in the 16th century [10].

What did mathematicians do before? They used words. Instead of `x + 2 = 5`,
they would write:

> There is such a number, that when you add 2 to it, you get 5. What is this
> number?

You can already get a sense of how annoying this could become. If all you have
are sentences, even the area of a triangle can get taxing to describe. With
variables, we could write:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjAyOC1iOGQ5ZTdkOC0xM2M2LTRlZWUtOTgwYS04NDAxN2IxODg4MjMucG5n)

1/2 w * h

Without variables, we’d be stuck with:

> Pick one side of the triangle. Measure this side. Now measure the straight
> line that connects from the opposite angle, to the side you chose. Multiply
> these two numbers together, and divide by two to get the area.

At some point, problems get so complicated that we can’t solve them with words
anymore; no person’s head could fit the space required. That’s where variables
come to the rescue. `x` isn’t just any mundane character, but a shorthand for
our brain: what was intractable before can now fit into a middle schooler’s
head.

That's thrilling and begs the question: what _other_ concepts exist like this
that we haven't discovered yet?

### Complications

Programmers think about this question all the time. Why? Let’s look at our
code for clues:

[code]

    radius = 20
    pixels = []
    for degrees in [0..360]:
      x = radius * cos(degrees)
      y = radius * sin(degrees)
      into(pixels, [x, y])
    
    turn_on(pixels)
[/code]

We were a bit mistaken here. We assumed our center was at `[0,0]`, and our
radius was `20`. What if we wanted to draw _another_ circle, but this time
with a center of `[5, 5]` and a radius of `15`?

We could write this:

[code]

    radius = 20
    pixels = []
    for degrees in [0..360]:
      x = radius * cos(degrees)
      y = radius * sin(degrees)
      into(pixels, [x, y])
    
    turn_on(pixels)
    
    radius_two = 15
    center_two = [5,5]
    pixels_two = []
    for degrees in [0..360]:
      x = center_two.x + radius_two * cos(degrees)
      y = center_two.y + radius_two * sin(degrees)
      into(pixels_two, [x, y])
    
    turn_on(pixels_two)
[/code]

But already this is getting hard to think about. What if we wanted to draw a
hundred different circles? We can’t just keep copying and pasting. We’d barely
get to triangles before our program spilled out of our heads.

### Snippets

We’re forced to invent a new concept. Here’s one; what if our language had a
“snippet”? A way for us to say `draw_circle`, with different options for
`center` and `radius`:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjA4OC0zOWNjMzE5OS03NmE4LTRiY2UtYjczMi01M2VlMWFjZDdlYzEucG5n)

draw_circle

This is how it could work:

[code]

    def draw_circle(center, radius):
      pixels = []
      for degrees in [0..360]:
        x = center.x + radius * cos(degrees)
        y = center.y + radius * sin(degrees)
        into(pixels, [x, y])
      pixels
    
    turn_on(draw_circle([0, 0], 20)) # Draws one circle
    turn_on(draw_circle([5, 5], 15)) # And another one!
[/code]

`def` becomes our “snippet” making concept. Whenever we write
`draw_circle(…)`, it’s as though we run the code inside it, with `center` and
`radius` set differently.

Just like variables, `def` gives our minds a shorthand to think with. Now
drawing a hundred circles is easy peasy. Not only that, but wherever someone
sees `draw_circle`, they no longer need to think about how it works; if we
find a more efficient way to draw a circle for example, we could change our
snippet and nobody would be the wiser. [11]

### Map

`def` is just the beginning. Let’s keep going. Look at `draw_circle` again:

[code]

    pixels = []
    for degrees in [0..360]:
      x = center.x + radius * cos(degrees)
      y = center.y + radius * sin(degrees)
      into(pixels, [x, y])
    pixels
[/code]

We can write it like this, but what’s _really_ going on here?

If you think about it, we’re _transforming_ one list (of degrees) to another
list (of pixels). If we use an analogy in the real world, it could look like
an assembly line:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjEzMS1iMjU0ZTRkZi0xODczLTQ3MGEtYjJmMy1iYzc1NzU4MWQyNjkucG5n)

Assembly Lines

There’s one assembly line with `degrees` and a worker beside it. The worker
picks up each `degrees`, figures out the corresponding pixel, and adds them to
the `pixel` assembly line.

It took a sentence to explain, but it’s a valuable concept, and we can
generalize it. What if we called this `map` ? A worker “maps” `degrees` to
`pixels`. Here’s how how our program could look now:

[code]

    def draw_circle(center, radius):
      map [0..360]: 
        degrees =>
        [center.x + radius * cos(degrees), center.y + radius * sin(degrees)]
[/code]

Now whenever we see `map`, the assembly line idea pops into our head. Not only
does it give us a shorthand, but it opens up a new world; what _else_ goes on
in assembly lines, and can we use those concepts to help us think better? [12]

### Logic

Just with circles, we were forced to invent snippets and map. Imagine all that
we’d discover if we kept going: what about shadows? what about layers?

The computer can only understand precise instructions, and there are only so
many precise instructions we can keep in our heads. The more complicated the
programs we write, the more we’re forced to invent new concepts. From there
comes the programmer’s first insight: _they learn what helps humans think
better._

Already we hit an interesting philosophical plane. When you learn what helps
humans think better, you’re bound to ask _why._ But it gets grander.

## Reality, II

Now as we progress on with pixel.fyi, we’d want to support “undo” and “redo”.
If a painter drew a smiley and didn’t like the nose, they should be able to
“undo” it:

### Undo / Redo

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjE3Ny1iMDc2MTkzZC1mZDE3LTQ1NmYtOGUzMy0wMzI5OWEzZTNmYTYucG5n)

Scratch the nose

How could we support this? If we just `turn_on(draw_circle(...))` all over the
place, there’s no way for us to know what the last instruction would be. It’s
time for us to look for a new concept.

### Time

Here’s a new idea. What if we kept track of the painting over _time_?
Something like this:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjIwNC1kYzhhZGY1NS03MjAyLTQ1ZTgtYjU2Ni1kZTY5YzEyY2RiMWIucG5n)

Painting over time

We have a list that represents time. Any change we make creates a new
“version” of the painting, and adds it to the list. A painting at a point in
time is just all the pixels that are turned on then.

“Current” points to the version we show our user. When they press “undo” or
“redo”, we simply _move_ “current” to another version in our list.

In our computer language, it could look something like this:

[code]

    painting = [[]]
    current = 0
    
    def add_circle(center, radius):
      last_version = painting[current]
      new_version = into(last_version, draw_circle(center, radius))
      into(painting, new_version)
      current = current + 1
    
    def undo(): 
      current = current - 1
    
    loop: 
      turn_off(all_pixels)
      turn_on(paintings[current]))
[/code]

This would support undo / redo, but it also opens up some interesting
questions.

### Identity

First, consider that when we think about a “painting” in real life, we think
about it as the end result. But here, we think about a painting as _all the
versions that existed throughout time._

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjI1NC05NTdkY2EwMS03YjZiLTRmMDctOTU5MC04OTUxNzI4YzJhZGUucG5n)

Two views

It’s convenient to think this way for undo and redo, but isn’t life _actually_
like this? Unfortunately, we are stuck in 3 dimensions and can't travel
through time, but if we could, we would see that identity encompasses time. A
painting begun, even if it goes through change after change, is the same
painting in the end. That’s the same with people; no cell in your body existed
when you were 5, but you’re still you.

### Change

Another interesting idea, how _does_ change happen? When we draw, we think we
irrevocably modify the canvas. But if we could travel through time, we’d see
something different: the canvas would _evolve._ After all, if you add a nose
and go back in time, you’d still see the canvas without the nose, so how could
the canvas have been irrevocably modified _?_

As it turns out, my friend Dennis [13] was so intrigued by this idea that he
once explored a 3D animation for it, and it was about painting to boot. Here’s
his rendering of a painting that evolves over time:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/firstFrame/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU3NDQwNy0zMTIwOGNiNy1lYTFjLTRmNmMtOTQ2MS05OTZiZDdhZTUzYjIuZ2lm)

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/firstFrame/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU3NDQ5Ny03NDI4Yjc4ZC05YzExLTRmMTQtOGM2MS1jMGE4MjVhZWY5NTIuZ2lm)

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU3NDU5Mi1iM2Y5ZTlmOC1lZjNjLTQyYWEtODBiNC01ZGMwMWVmYzVkMmIuanBlZw)

So darn interesting. We’ve lived in four dimensions all along but never saw it
like this.

### Perception

And the insights don’t stop. Remember, this is a _multiplayer_ drawing app.
Could “Stopa” and “Joe” draw a shape _at the same time?_

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjMwOC01N2YyZTVhMC0yOWIxLTQ5ZGQtOWUzMi0xNWQxMGQwZWQ5MWQucG5n)

Oops

This couldn’t happen when painting in real life; our hands don’t move fast
enough. But a computer moves real fast; it’s certainly possible that Joe sees
a blue shape and makes it red, but by the time this completes, Stopa sees the
same blue shape and makes it green.

This problem opens an interesting question about how we perceive _anything_ in
life! If your friend is in front of you for example, how do you _see_ them?

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjM0Mi1lNDE2M2FmZi0xOThkLTRlMmYtOTJiYi01MGYwNTg4NTFjM2YucG5n)

Perception

Well, light bounces around the room. Some of it hits your friend and reflects
into your eyes. Your eyes then process the light, which activates signals in
your brain. Those signals in turn activate more signals, until a thought pops
up: “I see my friend”.

All of this takes time, right? It _feels_ instant, but it takes time for light
to move and for signals to activate in your brain. This means then, _that
everything you see is from the past_!

When you try to solve problems like “Joe and Stopa change the same shape at
the same time”, you realize at least computers always see the past. It’s awe-
inspiring that our reality works the same. We just experienced a sliver of the
programmer’s second insight: _they learn to unravel the secrets of nature._
[14]

## Transcendence, II

As programmers master these insights, they take their work to heights we
couldn’t have imagined before. Well, actually we don’t know this quite yet,
because we programmers haven’t mastered the insights!

### Giotto

If you paralleled the story of programmers with Renaissance painters, we’d be
at the Giotto stage:

![](https://stopa.io/api/image/aHR0cHM6Ly91c2VyLWltYWdlcy5naXRodWJ1c2VyY29udGVudC5jb20vOTg0NTc0LzE2MzU4NjM4OS00MjhhZWVmMi1hYTQ0LTQ3ODYtOGZmNC02Mjg2ODI3MDY0MzUucG5n)

Kiss of Judas, Giotto

Giotto was early. Before him, most painters followed strict rules and their
work was flat. He questioned assumptions, began to study nature, and made
giant leaps in his lifetime [15]. Though his own work was still crude, in only
a few generations Michelangelo would step on the scene.

That’s where the best programmers are today. Our work is crude, but we’re
questioning assumptions and constantly looking for inspiration from nature.
It’s so early that some of the best ideas are prime picking, and the state of
the art evolves every year. We can already see astonishing results at the
edges, like computers transcribing human speech with better accuracy or self-
driving cars whizzing around roads.

### Progress

We’re left in an exciting state. I’m curious to know what transcendence will
look like in our field. Computers are faster than any natural organ in our
body. They need no sleep, can work 24/7, can “distribute” their brains around
the world, and run for millennia. What kind of surprises lie ahead for us?
What kind of concepts will the Michelangelo programmers of the future be
using?

These insights touch on what makes programming _art._ Programming isn’t a rote
exercise, but an inquiry into reality and perception.

* * *

## Art

Wow, what a journey we just went on.

### Painters and Programmers

We learned that the brush forces the painter to notice details that we’d
ignore. The painter’s goal is to affect us, and successive paintings help them
unravel our subconscious drivers. Invariably they discover secrets of nature,
and eventually transcend it.

Similarly, the computer language forces the programmer to notice details that
we’d ignore. Their goal is to solve hard problems, and successive solutions
help them unravel tools for human thought. Invariably they discover secrets of
nature, and eventually transcend it.

### Writers and Creators

It strikes me, that perhaps all creative pursuits are like this. This essay
was born from a conversation, where I tried to explain why I found programming
so invigorating. I thought I’d start with painting as the metaphor. However,
putting words to paper had me discovering details I had ignored. I was plunged
into book after book on art and even expanded my thinking on programming. [16]

There’s an obvious utility to the output of creation, but even if there
wasn’t, I think there would be an overwhelming reason to do it anyway, just
for the insights you get. [17]

I hope this got you thrilled about the beauty of making things.

## Credits

Ernst Gombrich’s “Story of Art” influenced how I saw art throughout the ages.
PG is a hero of mine, and his essays on hacking and painting continue to
inspire me [18]. I am taken by Rich Hickey’s model for programming. His
motivations for Clojure largely inspired the “Reality, II” section. [19]

 _Thanks to Joe Averbukh, Daniel Woelfel, Nicole Garcia Fischer, Mark Shlick,
Lina Wang, Dennis Heihoff, Alex Reichert, Julien Odent, Irakli Popkhadze,
Simon Chaffetz, Jacky Wang, Nino Parunashvili, Marek Golias for reviewing
drafts of this essay_

